@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

In this chapter will guide you through setting up
configurations on your system.

@menu
* /etc/geolocation::
* /etc/hostname::
* /etc/localtime::
* /etc/metar::
@end menu



@node /etc/geolocation
@section @file{/etc/geolocation}

@file{/etc/geolocation} is a cross-application configration
file, which is not used by any of the GNU/Pony software.
GNU/Pony does not track your location. This section of the
hoofbook is merely informational. You do not need to set up
this file.

@file{/etc/geolocation} is a plain-text file. All lines
except the first line are ignored, even if the first line
is empty. The first line shall contain the your geographical
location measured in the Global Positioning System (GPS),
and stored in decimal format. The line shall contain the
latitude and the longitude, separated by any amount of
whitespace. Users on the southern hemisphere shall specify
a negative latitude. Users on the western hemisphere shall
specify negative longitude. The line most be in ASCII, and
dot (@code{.}) is the decimal point.

Good ways to find your location include using an online
phonebook, or look up your town on Wikipedia and click on
``Coordinates'' link (to GeoHack) in the corner. Note that
Wikipedia does not use decimal format, why you need to
click on the link. Examples:

@table @asis 
@iftex
@item Arc de Triomphe de l@sc{@char 13}Étoile
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@item Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile
@end ifnottex
@example
48.8738 2.295
@end example

@item Arch of Constantine
@example
41.889722 12.490833
@end example

@item Big Ben
@example
51.500756 -0.124661
@end example

@item Colosseum
@example
41.890169 12.492269
@end example

@item Eiffel Tower
@example
48.858222 2.2945
@end example

@item Gävle Goat
@example
60.6730 17.1464
@end example

@item Hanging Gardens of Babylon
@example
32.5355 44.4275
@end example

@item Jakobsberg's Windmill
@example
59.426111 17.829167
@end example

@item London Eye
@example
51.5033 -0.1197
@end example

@item Kristall, vertikal accent i glas och stål
@example
59.332583 18.065194
@end example

@item Statue of Liberty
@example
40.689167 -74.044444
@end example

@item The Eden Project
@example
50.361944 -4.744722
@end example

@item Tropical Islands Resort
@example
52.0375 13.748611
@end example

@end table



@node /etc/hostname
@section @file{/etc/hostname}

@file{/etc/hostname} is a system configuration file.
It is a single-line plain-text file that shall contain
the hostname of the machine.



@node /etc/metar
@section @file{/etc/metar}

@file{/etc/metar} is a cross-application configration
file, which is not used by any of the GNU/Pony software.
GNU/Pony does not track your location. This section of
the hoofbook is merely informational. You do not need to
set up this file.

@file{/etc/metar} is a plain-text file. All lines except
the first line are ignored, even if the first line is
empty. The first line shall contain the METAR station
(weather station, commonly an airport) closest to you. The
METAR station shall be identified by its four-letter/digit
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) station
identifier.

The easiest way to set this up is by installing
@command{metar} and set up @file{/etc/geolocation}
(see @ref{/etc/geolocation}), and then run

@example
metar closest > /etc/geolocation
@end example

To speed up the process, you can instead run (assuming
your shell is GNU Bash)

@example
metar closest <(metar list PREFIX) > /etc/geolocation
@end example

@noindent
where @code{PREFIX} is selected from the following list:

@itemize @bullet
@item Afghanistan:
@code{'\(EQ\|OA\)'}
@item Alaska:
@code{P}
@item Albania:
@code{LA}
@item Algeria:
@code{DA}
@item Angola:
@code{FN}
@item Antarctica:
@code{NZ}
@item Argentina:
@code{SA}
@item Armenia:
@code{'U[DG]'}
@item Australia:
@code{'[YA]'}
@item Austria:
@code{LO}
@item Azerbaijan:
@code{'\(AZ\|UB\)'}
@item Bahamas:
@code{'M[BY]'}
@item Bahrain:
@code{OB}
@item Bangladesh:
@code{VG}
@item Barbados:
@code{TB}
@item Belarus:
@code{UM}
@item Belgium:
@code{EB}
@item Belize:
@code{MZ}
@item Benin:
@code{DB}
@item Bermuda:
@code{TX}
@item Bhutan:
@code{VQ}
@item Bolivia:
@code{SL}
@item Bosnia-Herzegovina:
@code{LQ}
@item Botswana:
@code{FB}
@item Brazil:
@code{'S[BW]'}
@item Bulgaria:
@code{LB}
@item Burkina Faso:
@code{DF}
@item Burma:
@code{'V[BY]'}
@item Burundi:
@code{HB}
@item Cambodia:
@code{VD}
@item Cameroon:
@code{FK}
@item Canada:
@code{C}
@item Cape Verde:
@code{GV}
@item Central African Republic:
@code{FE}
@item Chad:
@code{FT}
@item Chile:
@code{SC}
@item China:
@code{Z}
@item Colombia:
@code{'\(SK\|MC\)'}
@item Comoros:
@code{FM}
@item Congo:
@code{FC}
@item Costa Rica:
@code{MR}
@item Cote D'Ivoire:
@code{DI}
@item Croatia:
@code{LD}
@item Cuba:
@code{MU}
@item Cyprus:
@code{LC}
@item Czech Republic:
@code{LK}
@item Denmark:
@code{EK}
@item Djibouti:
@code{'H[DF]'}
@item Dominica Island:
@code{TD}
@item Dominican Republic:
@code{'\(MD\|TS\)'}
@item East Timor:
@code{WP}
@item Ecuador:
@code{SE}
@item Egypt:
@code{HE}
@item El Salvador:
@code{MS}
@item Equatorial Guinea:
@code{FG}
@item Estonia:
@code{EE}
@item Ethiopia:
@code{HA}
@item Falkland Islands:
@code{'\(SF\|EG\)'}
@item Fiji:
@code{'N[FGL]'}
@item Finland:
@code{EF}
@item France:
@code{LF}
@item Gabon:
@code{FO}
@item Gambia:
@code{GB}
@item Georgia:
@code{UG}
@item Germany:
@code{'E[DT]'}
@item Ghana:
@code{DG}
@item Gibraltar:
@code{LX}
@item Grand Cayman:
@code{MW}
@item Greece:
@code{LG}
@item Greenland:
@code{'B[GIM]'}
@item Grenada:
@code{'\(TG\|MK\)'}
@item Guatemala:
@code{MG}
@item Guinea-Bissau:
@code{'G[GU]'}
@item Guyana:
@code{'S[OY]'}
@item Haiti:
@code{'[CM]T'}
@item Hawaii:
@code{P}
@item Honduras:
@code{'\(MH\|TR\)'}
@item Hong Kong:
@code{'\(VH\|HK\)'}
@item Hungary:
@code{LH}
@item Iceland:
@code{BI}
@item India:
@code{'V[AEIO]'}
@item Indonesia:
@code{'W[AIR]'}
@item Iran:
@code{OI}
@item Iraq:
@code{'\(EQ|OR\)'}
@item Ireland:
@code{EI}
@item Israel:
@code{LL}
@item Italy:
@code{LI}
@item Jamaica:
@code{MK}
@item Japan:
@code{'\(R[JO]\|TA\)'}
@item Jordan:
@code{OJ}
@item Kazakhstan:
@code{UA}
@item Kenya:
@code{HK}
@item Korea:
@code{RK}
@item Kuwait:
@code{OK}
@item Kyrgyzstan:
@code{UC}
@item Lao:
@code{VL}
@item Latvia:
@code{'\(EV\|UM\)'}
@item Lebanon:
@code{OL}
@item Lesotho:
@code{FX}
@item Lesser Antilles:
@code{'\(MC\|T\)'}
@item Liberia:
@code{GL}
@item Libyan Arab Jamahi:
@code{HL}
@item Lithuania:
@code{EY}
@item Luxembourg:
@code{EL}
@item Macau:
@code{VM}
@item Macedonia:
@code{LW}
@item Madagascar:
@code{FM}
@item Malawi:
@code{FW}
@item Malaysia:
@code{'W[BM]'}
@item Maldives:
@code{VR}
@item Mali:
@code{GA}
@item Malta:
@code{LM}
@item Marshall Islands:
@code{'\(PK\|ML\|UJ\|EN\)'}
@item Mauritania:
@code{GQ}
@item Mauritius:
@code{'F[IJ]'}
@item Mexico:
@code{MM}
@item Micronesia:
@code{'P[GT]'}
@item Moldova:
@code{'\(LU\|UK\)'}
@item Montserrat:
@code{TR}
@item Morocco:
@code{GM}
@item Mozambique:
@code{FQ}
@item Myanmar:
@code{'V[BY]'}
@item Namibia:
@code{FY}
@item Nepal:
@code{VN}
@item Netherlands:
@code{EH}
@item New Caledonia:
@code{NW}
@item New Zealand:
@code{NZ}
@item Nicaragua:
@code{MN}
@item Niger:
@code{DR}
@item Nigeria:
@code{DN}
@item Norway:
@code{EN}
@item Oman:
@code{OO}
@item Pakistan:
@code{OP}
@item Panama:
@code{MP}
@item Papua New Guinea:
@code{AY}
@item Paraguay:
@code{SG}
@item Peru:
@code{SP}
@item Philippines:
@code{RP}
@item Poland:
@code{EP}
@item Polynesia:
@code{'N[CILSTW]'}
@item Portugal:
@code{LP}
@item Principe:
@code{FP}
@item Puerto Rico:
@code{TJ}
@item Qatar:
@code{OT}
@item Reunion:
@code{FM}
@item Romania:
@code{LR}
@item Russian Federation:
@code{U}
@item Rwanda:
@code{HR}
@item Sahara Occidental:
@code{GS}
@item Saint Helena:
@code{FH}
@item Samoa:
@code{'N[CILSTW]'}
@item Sao Tome:
@code{FP}
@item Saudi Arabia:
@code{OE}
@item Senegal:
@code{GO}
@item Seychelles:
@code{FS}
@item Sierra Leone:
@code{GF}
@item Singapore:
@code{WS}
@item Slovakia:
@code{LZ}
@item Slovenia:
@code{LJ}
@item Solomon Islands:
@code{AG}
@item Somalia:
@code{HC}
@item South Africa:
@code{FA}
@item Spain:
@code{'\(LE\|G[CE]\)'}
@item Sri Lanka:
@code{VC}
@item Sudan:
@code{HS}
@item Suriname:
@code{SM}
@item Swaziland:
@code{FD}
@item Sweden:
@code{ES}
@item Switzerland:
@code{LS}
@item Syria:
@code{OS}
@item Tadjikistan:
@code{UT}
@item Taiwan:
@code{RC}
@item Tanzania:
@code{HT}
@item Thailand:
@code{VT}
@item Togo:
@code{DX}
@item Tonga:
@code{'N[FGL]'}
@item Trinidad Tobago:
@code{TT}
@item Tunisia:
@code{DT}
@item Turkey:
@code{LT}
@item Turkmenistan:
@code{UT}
@item Tuvalu:
@code{'N[FGL]'}
@item Uganda:
@code{HU}
@item Ukraine:
@code{'U[KR]'}
@item United Arab Emirates:
@code{OM}
@item United Kingdom:
@code{EG}
@item United States:
@code{'\([PK]\|ML\)'}
@item Uruguay:
@code{SU}
@item Uzbekistan:
@code{UT}
@item Vanuatu:
@code{NV}
@item Venezuela:
@code{'[SM]V'}
@item Vietnam:
@code{'V[V-Y]'}
@item Virgin Islands:
@code{'\(KS\|T\)'}
@item Yemen:
@code{'O[YD]'}
@item Yugoslavia:
@code{'\(BK\|L[QY]\)'}
@item Zaire:
@code{FZ}
@item Zambia:
@code{FL}
@item Zimbabwe:
@code{FV}
@end itemize



@node /etc/localtime
@section @file{/etc/localtime}

@file{/etc/localtime} is a system configuration file. It shall
be a symbolic link to the file in @file{/usr/share/zoneinfo}
that describes the user's time zone in a summer time--standard
time-independent way. For example, if you are in Sweden, you
would make @file{/etc/localtime} a symbolic link to
@file{/usr/share/zoneinfo/Europe/Stockholm} --- the time zone
is Europe/Stockholm.

