@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

This chapter gives you a short introduction
to what GNU/Pony is.

@menu
* What is GNU/Pony?::
* For whom is GNU/Pony?::
* License information::
@end menu



@node What is GNU/Pony?
@section What is GNU/Pony?

GNU/Pony is a GNU/Linux distribution that aims
to be extremely customisable and simple. A
GNU/Linux distribution is a combination of the
operating system GNU and the operating
system kernel Linux with additional tools to
make your life easier.

The GNU Project started in 1983 by Richard
Stallman, also known as rms (from Richard
Matthew Stallman) so that your can have
freedom when you use your computer (not just
computer programs).



@node For whom is GNU/Pony?
@section For whom is GNU/Pony?

GNU/Pony is for the computer enthusiast who
wants an operating system tailored to her
own preferences down to that last detail and
does not mind building software from source.

@cindex ephemeral
@cindex paradigm
GNU/Pony also includes some optional programs
designed for using in terminals with a
specific paradigm: ephemeral, to run during
as short of time as possible, so you have as
few running processes at the same time as
possible.



@node License information
@section License information
@cindex licenses of GNU/Pony

GNU/Pony is an operating system distribution
with contains a few layers, which are licensed
differenly:

@table @asis
@item The boot manager
@cindex boot manager
The default boot manager is provided by SYSLINUX
which is licensed under the GNU General Public
License version 2.

@item The bootloader
@cindex bootloader
The default bootloader is provided by SYSLINUX
which is licensed under the GNU General Public
License version 2.

@item The kernel
@cindex kernel
The default kernel is currently Linux which is
licensed under the GNU General Public
License version 2 amoung other licenses.

@item The core userland
@cindex code userland
The default core userland is almost exclusively
GNU, a large collection of programs, which is
licensed under the GNU General Public License
version 3 and few other licenses.

@item The distribution userland
@cindex distribution userland
The GNU/Pony userland is the programs written
specifically for GNU/Pony. They are licensed
under the GNU General Public license 3 and the
GNU Affero General Public license 3, with parts
being licensed under the GNU All Permissive License.

There are however two exceptions:
@itemize @bullet
@item netcfg:
New BSD License (3-clause BSD License)
@item miscellaneous:
Do what the fuck you want to public license, version 2
@item system-configurations:
New BSD License (3-clause BSD License)
@end itemize

@item The ports tree
@cindex package repository
@cindex ports tree
The GNU/Pony package repository is licensed under
the GNU General Public License version 3, but the
individual scrolls are licensed under the GNU All
Permissive Licenses, but it is believed that
copyright is not forced upon them or that they
can even copyrighted at all.

The package repository is however install copyrighted
programs that can be of vertially any license. But
you have to opt out from strict freedom control to
install non-free programs, even if they are shareable.

@end table

@cindex Free Software
In short: with the exception for parts of the interim
default kernel, GNU/Pony is entirely Free Software,
but only almost entirely Open Source (but it does not
aim to be Open Source, only to be Free Software.)

