@node The bootstrap process
@chapter The bootstrap process

Sometimes the esoteric aspects for your computer
is the most important aspects for your computer.
Understanding them gives you insite in how to
optimally set up your computer after your needs.
This chapter gives you an overview of how a computer
boots, the entire way to your login manager. These
section are in the order of occurrence when booting
the computer.

@menu
* The master boot record::
* The boot manager::
* The bootloader::
* The initial random access memory disc::
* The initialisation process::
@end menu



@node The master boot record
@section The master boot record

@cindex BIOS
By default your BIOS will execute your storage
devices with the lowest port index. Execute
literally means that the entire content of
the device is treated as machine code that
the computer runs.

@cindex MBR
@cindex master boot record
The first 512 bytes in the device is called
the master boot record (MBR). The first 440
(or at most 446) bytes is the executed code,
and it ends with a halt instruction, so that
nothing beyond that is executed. The MBR also
contains information about the zero to
four primary partitions. For this documentation
we are going to assume that this is the
construction that is used, but it is not a
technical requirement, it is all up to the
operating system and boot manager.



@node The boot manager
@section The boot manager

@cindex boot manager
The boot manager a program stored in the
absolute beginning of a storage device, and
is the program that the BIOS executes.

@cindex boot manager
@cindex bootloader
@cindex boot flag
@cindex active flag
@cindex boot partition
@cindex bootable partitions
@cindex active partition
The mission in life for the boot manager
is to load the bootloader. It does this by
finding which primary partition@footnote{A
boot manager could technically also look at
logical and even extended partitions.} that
has a boot (also known as active) flag set.
Some boot managers supports multiple boot
flags and chooses either the first or last,
but partition table manipulators will often
unflag all flagged partitions when another
partition is flagged.

The bootloader is executed in the same way
as the boot manager, except it executes from
the beginning of the partition rather than
from the beginning of the disc.

@pindex SYSLINUX
SYSLINUX is a popular project that provides
a boot manager.



@node The bootloader
@section The bootloader

@cindex bootloader
@cindex chain loading
Some users, and some operating systems, choose
to hide the bootloader. It is the step where
the user can choose which operating system,
by its kernel, to start, it can also do chain
loading where it boots another bootloader or
boot manager.

The bootloader also lets you pass settings
to the operating systems kernel, such as
runlevel and root partition.

Technically a bootloader could open other
partitions, but traditionally it will either
chain load or execute files located in the
partition the bootloader is attached to.

@pindex SYSLINUX
SYSLINUX is a popular project that provides
a bootloader.



@node The initial random access memory disc
@section The initial random access memory disc

@cindex inital RAM disc
@cindex initrd
@cindex initramfs
The initial random access memory disc (init
RAM disc, initrd, or initramfs@footnote{Initial
RAM filesystem}) is an optional auxiliary boot
process step. It is a file archive, stored in the
same partition as the kernel, that is mounted to
the random access memory (RAM).

@pindex @command{init}
@pindex @command{/sbin/init}
The initrd provides boot instructions before
the root filesystem is mounted, the most important
parts are to locate partitions and decrypting
encrypted file systems. When it is done it
switches to the root filesystem and executes
/sbin/init, the initialisation process.

@pindex initram
GNU/Pony's default initrd is simply called initram.



@node The initialisation process
@section The initialisation process

@cindex initialisation process
@pindex SysVInit
@pindex pony-initialisation
@pindex systemd
The initialisation process is the final step and
largest step in the boot process. In GNU/Pony's
default setup this process is provided by
SysVInit which is assisted by GNU/Pony's package
@w{pony-initialisation}, or actually reverse:
@w{pony-initialisation} provides to policy, 
SysVInit provides to mechanism. A popular
alternative to the two is systemd, which does not
to this separation, nor other separations.

@cindex daemon processes
@cindex login manager
SysVInit and pony-initialisation applies system
configurations, loads daemon processes and
starts your login manager.

