@node The login process
@chapter The login process

@cindex login
@cindex login management
@cindex login session
This chapter introduces you to how login
management works in GNU/Pony and other
Unix-like operating systems.

@menu
* Teletypewriter login management::
* Graphical login management::
* Login sessions::
@end menu



@node Teletypewriter login management
@section Teletypewriter login management

@cindex runlevel
@cindex runlevel 3
By default GNU/Pony boots into runlevel 3,
this is a specification on what you want
your operating system to start when it
boots. Runlevel 3 implies multiple virtual
terminals (teletypewriters) but no graphics
started by default.

@pindex @command{getty}
@pindex @command{login}
@pindex util-linux
The login management for teletypewriters
are divided into two programs, the getty
and the login programs. `getty' is portmanteau
of `get' and `TTY'@footnote{TTY is an
abbreviation of teletypewriter.}, its
purpose is gain access to a terminal and
start the login program which performs
the login. It is always the login program
that reads the passphrase and verifies it,
but which program that reads the username
depends on which programs you choose as
your getty and login programs.

@pindex @command{agetty}
If choose @command{agetty} and @command{login}
from util-linux, which is the default on
GNU/Pony, it is @command{agetty} that reads
the username, but @command{login} is fully
capable to do so.

@pindex @command{gates-of-tartaros}
If you choose GNU/Pony's @command{gates-of-tartaros}
instead of @command{agetty}, it will also
read the username, but fore better reasons.
@command{gates-of-tartaros} is capable to
start @command{ssh} instead of @command{login}
if the user specifies which host she wants
to log in into, and to lock the terminal for
ten minutes if it detects that somepony is trying
to cheat its way through user authentication.
@command{gates-of-tartaros} is also extensible,
and comes with an extension that allows the
user to use upper case letter when typing the
username and in such case behave like Unix and
configure the terminal to print everything
(that is ASCII) in upper case, which however
breaks colouring.

@pindex @command{cerberus}
@pindex @command{libpassphrase}
You can also choose to use GNU/Pony's
@command{cerberus} instead of @command{login},
either by linking @file{/usr/local/sbin/login}
to it (or by other means put it into @var{PATH}
with higher precedence than @command{login}) or
by configuring @command{gates-of-tartaros} to
use @command{cerberus} instead of @command{login}.
@command{cerberus} is not capable of ready
the username, but is more configurable (but only
compile-time configurable), minimal, and uses
libpassphrase which allows you to configure how
the terminal behaves when the program reads a
passphrase.



@node Graphical login management
@section Graphical login management

@cindex runlevel
@cindex runlevel 5
@cindex display manager
By default GNU/Pony boots into runlevel 3,
which does not start graphics by default.
Booting into runlevel 5 instead will start
graphics by default, and you will graphical
login manager which is what you will be used
to if you come from a distribution of
operating system that is more promiscuous
about with whom it is user-friendly.

A graphical login manager is called a
`display manager', which is a misnomer. It
does not really manage the display, that
is done by the display server.

@pindex XDM
@pindex SLiM
@pindex systemd
@pindex PAM
@pindex Pluggable Authentication Modules
GNU/Pony does not have a default graphical
login manager, but popular graphical login
managers include XDM and SLiM and login
managers designed for specific desktop
environments. Before commiting to a graphical
display manager you should make sure it works
problem free with systemd if you also choose
to use systemd. Issues by be caused by use of
Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM) that is
incompatible with systemd.

@pindex desktop
A display manager graphical (login manager)
is three core missions: to start the display
server, to ask for username and passphrase and
login the user, and to as the user which
desktop start and start it.



@node Login sessions
@section Login sessions

@cindex login session
@cindex PAM
@pindex Pluggable Authentication Modules
@cindex session leader
@cindex process group
@cindex login shell
A login session is the period between a user
login and a corresponding logout. When a user
logs in she is granted exclusive access to
a terminal or X session@footnote{The same
virtual terminal as the user used to log in,
but it can theoretically be on any virtual
terminal.} that was previousely owned by the
root user. For a non-graphical login, the
users default shell is executed, as a login
shell, which means that it 0:th command line
argument is prefixed by a dash and the profile
script is executed. The parent to the shell
is the session leader and the creator of a
new process groups. If program exits, which
is does when the login shell exits, all programs
in the same session is terminated. The login
program, that started the shell, opens (on login)
and closes (on logout) a Pluggable Authentication
Modules (PAM) session if it uses PAM.

@pindex @command{su}
@cindex user switching
@cindex switch user
@cindex nested login
@cindex login, nested
Theoretically, and even implemented on some
old systems, nested login sessions are possible,
this is however considered insecure, and
instead you do a user switches, which is when
your start a new (non-login) shell as a different
user without create a new session, using the
command @command{su}.

