@node Transitioning
@chapter Transitioning

This chapter is intended to help you
with transitioning to GNU/Pony from
other operating systems.

@menu
* Transitioning from other distributions::
* Transitioning from a BSD::
* Transitioning from Windows::
@end menu


@node Transitioning from other distributions
@section Transitioning from other distributions

Users of Arch Linux, Gentoo and similar
distributions should feel comfortable
switching to GNU/Pony. Other users may
find it helpful to first transition to
Parabola GNU/Linux (if coming from a
GNU/Linux-libre distribution) or
Arch Linux (otherwise), and use it for
a week or two, if they are not
comfortable using the terminal to do
everything that can be done in the
terminal.



@node Transitioning from a BSD
@section Transitioning from a BSD

FreeBSD users should feel comfortable
switching to GNU/Pony. PC-BSD users
may find it helpful to first transition
to FreeBSD and stay on it for about two
weaks.



@node Transitioning from Windows
@section Transitioning from Windows

Many Windows users find it difficult it
transition to any GNU/Linux distribution.
Many users try to ease it by dual-booting
(having both operating systems installed
on the same computer), this is not
recommended as you often find yourself
booting into Windows quickly when you do
not know how to perform a task and get
stuck in Windows. It may be easier to
install GNU/Linux on your primary computer
and Windows on a secondary computer that
you perfer not to use, or put Windows in
QEMU or VirtualBox@footnote{VirtualBox
is not entirely free as it cannot be
compiled with a free compiler. But is
easier to get started using than QEMU
so it may be a better choose in the
transition phase from Windows.} if you
only have one computer.

Windows users should keep in mind that
GNU/Linux is a completely different
philosophy of computing. Try to find
replacements for your Windows programs
that run on both Windows and GNU/Linux
and switch them one after each other
one.

When you have switched all programs
it easiest to switch to a GNU/Linux
that is beginner-friendly and uses a
desktop environment similar to that of
Windows. For this step you will need
to look at GNU/Linux distributions
yourself, do not ask a friend unless
she as switched herself and use her
computer very similarly to yourself.
DistroWatch can be a good source for
finding distributions. You can also
take a look at Linux Mint with Cinnamon
or Maté and at Zorin OS.

Once you feel conformatable with
the GNU/Linux distribution you have
choosen you can try Arch Linux,
followed by Parabola GNU/Linux for
a completely free computer experience.

Once you feel conformatable working
with Arch Linux and optionally
Parabola GNU/Linux you should be
ready to switch to GNU/Pony.

Keep in mind that switching from Windows
is a transition that can be challenging
and can take a very long time due to the
large difference in how you use it and
the program on it. But there are at
least 70 reasons to switch and you can
do your computing in freedom.

