@node Usage basics
@chapter Usage basics

@menu
* Virtual terminals::
* Shells::
* Text editors::
* Account management::
* Documentation::
@end menu


@node Virtual terminals
@section Virtual terminals

@cindex switch terminal
@cindex terminals, switch
@cindex TTY
@cindex teletypewriter
@cindex virtual terminal
@cindex terminal
By default no graphical environment is
installed, which means that you will
only have a basic terminal. However,
you can switch between terminals by
pressing @kbd{Alt+Left} and @kbd{Alt+Right}.
The terminals are index @file{tty1}
though @file{tty63} (all are not
available by default), pressing
@kbd{Alt+F4}, for example, will switch
directly to @file{tty4}. These terminals
of often called TTY:s (teletypewriters).



@node Shells
@section Shells

@cindex shell
@cindex terminal
When you log in on a terminal, or
open a new terminal in a graphical
session, a shell is opened. This is
program that lets you start other
program and perform actions using
script shell language. To start a
program you simply name it in the
most basic cases.

@pindex GNU Bash
@pindex @command{bash}
@pindex @command{chsh}
@cindex shell, change default
The default shell is GNU Bash, or
simply @command{bash}, if you want
to change it you can use the command
@command{chsh}.

@cindex @file{.bashrc}
@cindex @file{~/.bashrc}
@cindex shell, configure
@pindex bash.d
Must shells uses a script file in the
user's home directory to configure,
which includes how the shell looks.
The file is a dotfile (the filename
starts with a dot) with means it is
hidden. GNU Bash uses the file
@file{.bashrc}, which generally is
called @file{~/.bashrc}, @file{~/}
means that it is located in your
home directory. You can use the
package `bash.d' to configure your
GNU Bash shell, it is a collection
of files that can be included in
your @file{~/.bashrc} file.

@cindex shell, stop
@cindex shell, terminal
@cindex shell, close
To stop a program in the shell press
@kbd{Ctrl+c}. There are a few programs
that disables this which means that
you need to learn how to close those
programs individually.

@cindex shell, logout
You can close a shell by typing
@command{exit}, or in some shells
@command{logout}. If you have not
typed anything since the last time
you pressed enter, you can also
press @kbd{Ctrl+d}. Closing the
login shell means that you logout.
The login shell is the first shell
that is opened when you log in if
you have logged in on a terminal.

@cindex shell, pause
@cindex shell, suspend
@cindex shell, resume
You can also suspend a program
by pressing @kbd{Ctrl+z}. which
means that the program will be
completely paused and you are
returned to the shell. Typing
@command{%} or @command{fg}
resumes the last suspended
program.



@node Text editors
@section Text editors

@cindex text editor
@cindex editor, text
@pindex GNU Nano
@pindex @command{nano}
To edit configurations, and write
files in general, you need a text
editor. The simplest is called GNU
Nano, often just called Nano,
which is started with the command
@command{nano} followed by the file
you want to edit or create. You
can set the environment variable
@var{EDITOR} to the command you
want to use as your default editor.

@pindex GNU Emacs
@pindex @command{emacs}
@pindex @command{emacs -nw}
@opindex @option{-nw}, Emacs
A powerful alternative is GNU Emacs,
often just called Emacs, which is
started with the command @command{emacs}
instead of Nano's @command{nano}, or
@command{emacs -nw} if you want to
start it in the terminal and are
using a graphical environment. Learning
GNU Emacs, or another powerful, editor
will save you time (and mental sanity)
in the long run. Choosing Emacs means
that you will learn keyboard commands
similar to those of the shell. Emacs
is exited with the key combination
@kbd{C-x, C-c} with stands for
@kbd{Ctrl+x} followed by @kbd{Ctrl+c}.



@node Account management
@section Account management

@cindex passphrase, change
@cindex passwords, change
@cindex passphrase, generate
@cindex passwords, generate
@pindex @command{passwd}
@pindex @command{correctpony}
In today's world it is important to
secure your computers. One part of
this is to have strong passphrases.
You can change your user passphrase
with the command @command{passwd}.
To be sure that your passphrase is
secure, do not change it too often
and use passphrase generation. You
can installed the package correctpony
and run @command{correctpony} to
create a passphrase that is very
strong but easy to remember. If you
choose this method, use the first
passphrase it generates for you
and do not regenerate until you
find something you find easier to
remember. The only case you should
generate a new passphrase is if
you cannot spell the passphrase
that as generated or if it actually
forms a grammatically correct
sentence even if it is nonsense.

@cindex administrator
@cindex root, user
@cindex create user
@cindex user, create
@cindex delete user
@cindex user, delete
@cindex remove user
@cindex user, remove
@cindex modify user
@cindex user, modify
@pindex @command{sudo}
@pindex @command{useradd}
@pindex @command{userdel}
@pindex @command{usermod}
If you are an administrator, that is,
if you login or switch user to root,
or can use @command{sudo} to get
additional permissions, then you can
create, delete and modify users by
using the commands @command{useradd},
@command{userdel}, and
@command{usermod}, respectively.



@node Documentation
@section Documentation

Many programs have online
documentation, that is,
documentation that is included
in there's package can be
accesses on the computer.

@opindex @option{--help}
@opindex @option{-h}
@opindex @option{-H}
Documentation comes in many
forms. The simplest it write
@command{xyz --help} to get
a bit of documentation for
the command @command{xyz}.
However some programs by
use something else than
@option{--help}, sometimes
just @option{-h} or @option{-H}.

@cindex manpages
@cindex manual pages
@pindex @command{man}
For a bit more information
about a program you can
usally type @command{man xyz}.
@command{man} is a command
that opens a so called manpage
or manual page. These often
document efterthing you need
to know and is avaible for
many other things then program,
such a C header files and
system calls and functions
provided by libraries, as
well as configuration files.

@pindex @command{info}
If you want even more
documenation, most GNU programs
and GNU/Pony programs includes
@command{info} manuals, which is
the documentation format of
choose for GNU and GNU/Pony, but
other programs use them as well,
although not quite as many as
there are using @command{man}.
@command{info} manuals are
hypertext books. If a program
does not have an @command{info}
manuals, the command
@command{info} will open the
manpage for the program if it
has one.

@pindex @command{apropos}
@opindex @option{--apropos}, @command{info}
@pindex @command{info --apropos}
The commands @command{apropos}
and @command{info --apropos} can
be used to look up a concept
avaible in an unspecified manpage
or @command{info} manual, respectively.

@cindex @file{/use/doc}
@cindex HTML documentation
@cindex PDF documentation
@cindex plain text documentation
There is also a directory named
@file{/use/doc} in which package can
add documention of any form, usally
you will find HTML pages and PDF
manuals here, or sometimes just
plain text files.

If you have not used GNU or any
Unix-like operating system, such
as a BSD or Linux, before it is
highly recommended to take a
quick look at the first page of
@command{info coreutils} and
skim through chapter that you
think can be useful. You should
also read @command{man cd}.
Commands such as @command{ls},
@command{mkdir}, @command{cp},
@command{mv} and @command{rm}
are all very importation, you
can read about them by typing
@command{info coreutils} followed
by the name of one of those
commands.

