@node rms transcriptions
@appendix rms transcriptions

This appendix is a collection of transcriptions
form talks by Richard Stallman; always informative,
and sometimes fun.

@menu
* Free Software is not Open Source::
* GPL version 3 release speech::
* Virus-free GNU+Linux::
@end menu



@node Free Software is not Open Source
@section Free Software is not Open Source

@c https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FpAKasXdrXI

@smallquotation
Richard I so not think requires any
introduction to this audience, but I
he is the… almost the certainly the
father of the modern Open Source
movement… <interrupted>
@end smallquotation

No, absolutely not! If am the father of
Open Source it was done by artificial
insemination using @emph{stolen} sperm.
I am @emph{not} a supporter of Open Source,
I do @emph{not} agree with the basic values
of Open Source, I do @emph{not} try to
participate Open Source activities,
and when anyone refers to my work with
that term I take offence. You really
shouldn't have done that!
@smallquotation
Apologies!
@end smallquotation
You should have known better!
@smallquotation
And I do. And I think that is actually
a point I would like you to speak on
<unintelligible>.
@end smallquotation
The sad thing is that most people thin
that they are very familiar with my work
and what they think my work is, its
something I do not even agree with.
Completely wrong. I founded the Free
Software movement, a movement for computer
users' freedom. Freedom to control your
own computing and freedom to cooperate
with other people. These are freedoms
that I believe every computer user is
entitled to. It must never be taked away,
they should be inalienable rights for
the user of software. That is the idea
of the software movement. Non-free
sofware, proprietary software, keeps
users divided and helpless. Divided
because they are forbidden share with
anyone else and helpless because they
do not have the source code so that
can't control what the software does.
And in fact they are at the mercy of
the developer who does control it.
So a non-free software functions as
an instrument of the power of its
developer, power over the users. This
is an unjust social system that I
which to wipe out from the world.
That is the aim of the Free Software
movement. In order for every user
to have freedom that means there most
be no freedom denying software.



@node GPL version 3 release speech
@section GPL version 3 release speech

@c https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E5G7FU5j2Uc
@c https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KZNUVgPQpl8

Can I go to sleep now?

@smallquotation
Sure(<unintelligible>?) go ahead.
@end smallquotation

I guess I have to give a speech first.
I'm happy to say that we are actually
releasing GPL version 3 today, right
now I beleave, during this speech.
It is becoming official and people can
start to release software under GPL
version 3.

It has been essentially sixteen years
since GPL version 2 came out. We didn't
it would be this long before we made
the next version. I will try to attend
to future upgrade needs more quickly;
we won't wait more then a decade this
time.

But what is so important about GPL
version 3? Well first of all what is
the GPL for, what's its purpose. I
designed the GNU General Public License
for a very simple purpose: to defend
the freedom of @emph{every} user of a free
program. Not all free programs to this,
there are free programs that are release
under other licenses that are lax and
permissive, that allow modified version
to be made non-free. Some even allow…
just compiling it is enough excuse to
make it non-free; and what happens then?
The software may be very popular, it
may be powerful and reliable, but it
fails to deliver freedom to the users.
So the GNU General Public License is
designed to make sure that everyone how
gets the software also gets the essential
freedoms that the user of software
must have. These are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Freedom 0, the freedom to run the
program as you wish.

@item
Freedom 1, the freedom to study the
source code and change it so it does
what you wish.

@item
Freedom 2, the freedom to help your
neighbour, which is the freedom to
distribute exact copies up to and
including republication when you wish.

@item
Freedom 3, the freedom to contribute
to your community, the freedom to
distribute copies of your modified
versions up to and including
republication when you wish.
@end itemize

These are the freedoms necessary so we
can control our own computing and be good
helpful members of our communities; and
together they give us democratic control
over what our software does.

Only with a license @emph{like} the GNU GPL
do the users have these for freedoms.
@emph{But} the advisories of freedom don't
stand still. The thought of new ways to
separate users from their freedom since
GPL version 2 came out. So we have had to
find ways to block them from doing this
in order to make sure the GPL continues
to achive what have always been its goal.
For instance, there is a practice we call
tivoisation after the product that began
it. The TiVo contains software that were
released under the GPL version 2, and
they comply --- formally --- with the
requirements of GPL version 2. But it
doesn't do the user of the TiVo any good.
Yes, the user can get the source code
for that software, but if the user tries
to change it and compile it and install
it into the TiVo it won't run. It's
@emph{guaranteed} not to run, and that is
no accident, the TiVo contains special
circuitry to check the signature of the
program and if it has been modified at
all then it shuts down. Now why would
they do a thing like this? The reason
is not innocent, the reason is because
the TiVo designed to restrict the user
and spy on the user. Nasty malicious
features. And they want to make sure
the user can't get rid of these nasty
features in the most natural way.
The way users are suppost to be able
to do with Free Software.

So GPL version 2 blocks this practice.
Sorry GPL version @emph{3} blocks this
practice! It says that if you distribute
binaries in a product to consumers
that you got to provide them with
whatever information is sufficient so
that they can install and run their
modified version in the products they
bought.

This is another variation of tivoisation.
Which is treacherous computing. That is
were the computer is designed so that a
website that you try to talk to can tell
whether you are running the officially
approved software or your own modified
version. And if you are running your own
modified version then it says they do
not trust you, so you are not allowed to
talk to the website. Well, with GPL version
3 that is not allowed either! They have
to provide you with information sufficient
to install your modified versions so that
they can functions just as the <stumbling>
original version would have done unless
your change is to make it do something
else. They are not allowed to distribute
it in such a way that the mere fact that
you modified it prevents it from
functioning the way the original version
would have. So we've blocked both varients
of this way of turning freedom number 1,
the freedom to study and change the
source code and make the program do what
you wish into a sham.

Another threat to our freedom comes from
software patents. I'm sure you've heard
about the Novell–Microsoft deal, which as
dangerous because effectively Novell is
going to pay Microsoft to give custumers
protection from some of Microsoft's
patents. Well, if Microsoft or anyone can
make users pay for the privilege of
running Free Software that takes away
freedom 0, the freedom to run the program
as you wish. We can't sit idly by and let
that happen. Now GPL version 2 hade a
change in it from GPL version 1 to protect
us against use of software patents to
make the program effectively non-free.
But it only applies to when the distributor
gets a patent license. Well, in the
Novell–Microsoft deal they were clever
and Microsoft did not give Novell a patent
licenses. So they slipped through this
crack in GPL version 2. Well, in GPL
version 3 we do not have this crack
anymore, such deals are not allowed.
@emph{However}, instead of simply saying that
Novell cannot distribute GPL version 3
coverted programs under their deal, we
found a cleverer thing to do with it:
when Microsoft upgrades to versions that
are covered by GPL version 3, GPL version
3 will extend this patent protection
from the customers of Novell to everybody
that uses those programs. Effectively
we found a way to turn that deal against
Microsoft and make it backfire. So it is
extremely important for Free Software
to upgrade the license to GPL version 3,
so that Microsoft… <correcting> Novell
will in the cause of time put in the new
versions and thus our community will get
this benefit. It has to be done fairly
soon, because if we wait @emph{too} long
Microsoft may distribute all its coupons
and then we won't be able to turn the
deal against them anymore. So get your
programs relicensed @emph{soon}, it is very
important! We expect @emph{all} the maintainers
of GNU software to relicense in the next
few months, it is important. But other
Free Software developers should also
relicense. There will be people how ask
you not to do so. A minority of our
community seems to be very angry about
GPL version 3; and when we try to probe
to find out their motives, it usually
turns out that they disagrees with the
goals of the GNU GPL, the goal of
guaranteeing freedom for every user.
Please, we people that holds those
views ask you to leave users' freedom
vulnerable, don't listen to them, defend
the freedom users' freedom, that's
imporant. And even if there are people
that who would ask us not to do it,
we got to do it. We have to defend the
users' freedom against these threats.

There are of cause many other advantages
in GPL version 3: compatibility with
the Apache license is one, better
internationallisation is another.
You'll also find that its termination
conditions work much better in the case
of a distributor of an entire GNU+Linux
distribution who makes a mistake and
thus violates the GPL for thousands of
programs at once and of cause wants to
correct it. With GPL version 2 those…
<correcting> that person who made a
mistake has to… <correcting> loses
the licenses permanently for every
program from every copyright holder
and has to the go and beg forgiveness
from everyone, which is not feasible.
But with GPL version 3 if thay correct
the mistake and the copyright holders
do not complain in 60 says then they
are in the clear. So they only have
to negotiate with those that actually
did complain. Assuming of cause that
they are sincere people and they
correct their mistake. We are still
in a good position to enforce the
license against anyone how intends
to violate it and does not correct
a mistake. So… GPL version 3 will
help our community any many ways…
and I urge people to upgrade to it.

Thank you!



@node Virus-free GNU+Linux
@section Virus-free GNU+Linux

@c  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kfli_e923o4

@smallquotation
They say that GNU systems, or GNU/Linux
systems doesn't get effected by virus.
@end smallquotation

Well, that is usally true. And there
are a few reasons for this. First of
all, we designed it from the beginning
as a multiple user time sharing system.
These days of cause people usually run
it on a PC and there is only one user.
But it was designed for a large
computer that would be having five or
ten users at the same time. So it was
designed to keep them isolated from
each other and not let anybody destroy
the system. Where as Windows was not
designed for that. Second, Microsoft
persistently makes a really kind of
a decision where they run program
that arrive in files that you just
happen to have on your computers. So
of cause that makes it terrible
vulnerably to viruses.
And of cause there is also one other
factor: since Windows is more widely
used, virus writers prefers to attack
Windows. Well some day if the GNU+Linux
system is more popular we will lose
that advantage but we will still have
the other two.

